---
title: "Where am I?"
date: 2024-08-18T17:36:48-04:00
tags: []
draft: true
---

I've been thinking recently about place. These thoughts began, I suppose, when I moved from Boston to the Southern Tier of New York in August 2021. I had lived four years in Boston; during the course of those years my wife & I married & I completed most of a PhD.[^1] This is not the first time I am living in the Southern Tier, for I did my undergraduate degree at the same institution where I now teach. But this is the first time I'm thinking about this region as my home, should my employer grant me tenure in a few years, for at least the next several decades.

	[^1]: I say "most" because my dissertation was basically done by the time we left Boston, but I would not defend it until two & a half months or so after we moved.

I'm not sure that I've ever paid much attention to the place where I lived. Growing up in the suburbs of Rochester I suppose I would have thought of myself as living in western New York. But I don't really, then or now, identify myself as a western New Yorker in the way that someone from, say, Indiana would identify themself as a Midwesterner.[^2] Many people I know do strongly identify as western New Yorkers, though what precisely they claim by that identity I'm not quite sure. Perhaps the problem is that I do not care at all about the Buffalo Bills; that seems to be an important unifying trait for western New Yorkers. Many western New Yorkers I know also strongly identify as *not* being from New York City. That is an impulse I can't quite understand. I admit to a vague feeling of annoyance when asked about only New York City after someone learns I live in New York---I was closer to the city when I lived in Baltimore than I am now---but I don't care enough to build an entire identity around it.

	[^2]: Speaking of the Midwest, I think there's some reason to think that western New York is a better cultural fit with what is commonly known as the Midwest than much of the rest of New York. Many of the cultural markers my Midwestern friends assure me are "so Midwestern" are familiar to me from my upbringing in the Rochester area. I've seen a map floating around social media recently locating the Great Lakes region (including the counties in New York bordering Lakes Erie & Ontario) as a subregion of the Midwest. With these points in mind, I've suggested to some Midwestern friends that perhaps I, too, am from the Midwest. I'm surprised at how offensive they seem to find the suggestion.

I wonder how much of the "placelessness" of my childhood is the result of spending much of my childhood in a suburb. There is surely something to the uniformity of suburbs & their rounded edges that dampens the distinctiveness of a region. I think it was when we moved to main street in the village of Churchville, & I could explore more than just cul-de-sacs & mowed lawns, that I began to develop a deeper sense of place. I could walk to the pizza place & to the library & to church; I would not have to ride my bike far to be among the farms where some of my friends lived & worked. When you're in a suburb you're nowhere, but in a village or a city or a farm you're somewhere.

In any case, whether I am or am not a western New York, now I live in the Southern Tier. & I am finding myself curious about the region in ways that surprise me, considering I have not in the past thought of myself in terms of regions. Maybe it's because of the culture shock of moving from a New England city to an Appalachian county; maybe it's because I find myself in political exile in a county that always votes red; maybe it's because I plan to be here for a while.
