---
title: "Three things no. 1"
date: 2024-09-28T10:05:02-04:00
tags: [three things, teaching]
summary: Blogging, RSS, & a writing lab
---

1. I've been very inconsistent **writing for this blog**. I tried to put a bit more regularity into things with the [logbook](/tags/logbook) format, but that became too much to keep up with, especially while the semester is in progress. So I'm going to try this [three things](/tags/three-things) format: on a more-or-less weekly basis I'll share three things that have been on my mind since the last three things post. I think I need some sort of "plan" if I'm going to write here regularly, but writing mini reviews of everything I was reading & watching (even if only a couple sentences each) was just way too much.

2. Over the past couple weeks I've been refreshing my **RSS feeds**. [When Google Reader was discontinued](https://www.theverge.com/23778253/google-reader-death-2013-rss-social) (RIP) I made the switch to [Feedly](https://feedly.com/), & then sometime more recently I switched to [Inoreader](https://www.inoreader.com/). (I don't remember why.) Inoreader never quite clicked with me, & so I wasn't really reading my RSS feeds all that consistently. But as part of a larger initiative to get a handle on my digital life (especially my email inbox) I'm trying to put as much as I can---especially email newsletters---into an RSS reader. I decided to try out Feedbin & I'm glad I did. The interface is really clean & pleasant to read, & it has enough features to elevate it above a free reader but not so many features as to overwhelm.

3. Yesterday I had a **writing lab** assignment in my [The Way of Francis & Clare](/posts/20230623_on-teaching-francis-clare/) class. (That reminds me, I need to write an update to how I'm approaching my Francis & Clare course.) By the end of the in-class writing lab, each student should have produced an outline for their first writing assignment, which they will write in class on Monday on the basis of their outlines (& only their outlines). Over the course of the writing lab students are encouraged to talk to one another & with me about whatever questions they have, whether relating to course material or the assignment instructions or whatever. 
I have several goals in mind with these in-class writing labs, but the main one is I hope students appreciate that writing is a process: there is a planning stage (considering the prompt; conducting research; outlining an approach; integrating various points into a single, coherent treatment; figuring out how these points relate to ideas learned in class & in research; documenting the sources of those ideas so they can be properly cited; etc.) that happens before words are even put to paper. I think this first writing lab was a success: I was able to have conversations with many students (many more than I can take in individual meetings during office hours) clarifying both course material & my expectations for the assignment, & I overheard conversations students were having among themselves about the material. I'm looking forward to reading the papers themselves next week.
