---
title: "November 2023 logbook"
date: 2023-11-30T00:38:35-05:00
tags: [reading, film, logbook]
---

In which I watched *Killers of the Flower Moon*, *The Blair Witch Project*, & *The Killing of a Sacred Deer*; & read *Questioning God*, *Ways of Seeing*, *Revelations of Divine Love*, & *Julian of Norwich, Theologian*.

*Killers of the Flower Moon* (Martin Scorsese, 2023). What an amazing film. I don't even want to say much about it here, because I know I can't do it justice in the space of a short paragraph. Each performance---especially Lily Gladstone's & Leonardo DiCaprio's---is exactly what it should be. If you haven't seen it, go see it.

*The Blair Witch Project* (Daniel Myrick and Eduardo Sánchez, 1999). I remember *Paranormal Activity* being huge when I was in high school; I was at the time too scared of scary movies, but I remember being intrigued by the "found footage" conceit. (I guess that style of horror was a little overdone, even by 2007.) *Blair Witch Project* is the film that mainstreamed found footage. What an incredible film! I thought [Heather Donahue](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2m_lqGnLtWA) was so good, & the night scenes were so spooky & effective. & that last shot! Learning more about its production from [the Unspooled podcast](https://www.unspooledpodcast.com/) really deepened my appreciation for it, too.

*The Killing of a Sacred Deer* (Yorgos Lanthimos, 2017). I decided to watch this more or less at random one night while Jacqueline was out of town---Netflix recommended it to me, & it seemed like a film that I would enjoy and Jac would not. I was certainly right about that. It made me want to see more of Lanthimos's work (& as it happens I was already looking forward to his *Poor Things*, even before watching this film).

*Questioning God* (Timothy Radcliffe & Łukasz Popko, 2023). One of my professors in undergrad said Timothy Radcliffe & I had a "similar style," & ever since then I've been trying to figure out what he means. (I took it, and still take it, as a compliment, though I'm still not quite sure what my professor saw in me.) I found this book a little disappointing. It's written as a dialogue between the coauthors, but I'm not sure that format was particularly effective. My favorite part of the book was the epilogue, which was not formatted as a dialogue (& so, I assume, was more properly "cowritten"). I understand why they wrote the book as a dialogue---the book is about dialogue between God & humans---but it didn't totally work for me.

*Ways of Seeing* (John Berger, 1972). Every piece of art has an ideology encoded into it. You've heard of the male gaze; Berger's analysis of the history of the female nude shows what that means. I have to think that Matt Weiner had the last chapter in mind when he created *Mad Men*: [“What you call love was invented by guys like me to sell nylons.”](https://youtu.be/fjg5TuXV09U?si=-BRxfq7KSGTohyOT)

*Revelations of Divine Love* (Julian of Norwich, ca. late 14th century). I've read Julian's *Shewings* a number of times before, but this time I was reading it for a chapter I'm writing. I was especially struck at Julian's insistence on the goodness & mercy of God, which makes for a fruitful contrast with her sustained reflections on suffering & Christ's passion.

*Julian of Norwich, Theologian* (Denys Turner, 2011). Wow, what a work. Turner's account of Julian's "two stories”---the story sin tells about itself, & the story that God tells about sin---is so illuminating. This book makes me want to design my entire Catholic Theology course around Julian's *Shewings*. (I won't because I don't have time ... but maybe someday.)

I also kept a log in [October 2023](/posts/20231031_logbook/).
