---
title: "A new blog"
date: 2023-12-27T08:00:00-05:00
tags: [technology]
---

When I started [micro blogging](https://micro.andrewbelfield.com) in 2021, I never planned to do anything but that: micro blog. I'd tried to blog before---my first website was a static site generated by Jekyll---but it had never stuck. I liked the idea of instead having a fairly low-effort, ephemeral site: a blog populated with posts about what I'm reading, quotations I'm mulling over, even some pictures, etc. For a while that's all I did with micro.blog.

But then, a little less than a year ago, I began writing some longer posts. These posts grew out of [some reading slightly related to my research](/posts/20230423_love-restores-the-world-to-order), & [some teaching](/posts/20230427_freely-given-gratefully-received), & [a talk I knew I wouldn't publish anywhere](/posts/20230623_on-teaching-francis-clare). I found I liked writing these longer posts. It was helpful to work through some ideas in writing, & it was nice to share some pieces I'd written that wouldn't otherwise be shared. But I didn't quite like having those posts on micro.blog. These longer posts were not full-on essays but they were certainly more substantial than the more frequent, much shorter posts that made up most of my micro.blog. I didn't want my longer posts to fall away into obsurity.

So, I decided to set up a blog (this blog) for those longer posts. It took me a little while to get it together---in part because of the busyness of the fall semester & in part because I took my a while to settle on [a Hugo theme I liked](https://themes.gohugo.io/themes/hugo-rocinante/)---but I'm excited to start using this new blog. I've transferred all my longer posts from micro.blog over to here, & I hope to post to this blog at least once a week or so (but we'll see how things go). As for my micro.blog, I'll keep posting there as I have been for the last couple years: books I'm reading, quotations, links, pictures, & the like. This blog will be for more extended thoughts---at least a paragraph's worth.

I'd had my micro.blog located at `blog dot andrew belfield dot com` because I never intended to have anything more than a micro.blog, & so the `blog` subdomain seemed appropriate to use there. Now that I have a proper blog, however, I've decided to reassign that subdomain to this blog, & I've given my micro.blog a new subdomain: `micro`. I know that's confusing---what was located at `blog dot andrew belfield dot com` is now located at `micro dot andrew belfield dot com`, & `blog dot andrew belfield dot com` is now an entirely new site---but these subdomains seem to make the most sense for what these sites have become.

I'd like to eventually figure out ways of making the site more navigable---making the tags easier to access, maybe, or incorporating a search function---but I'm very pleased with it for now. & in any case, much as I enjoy tinkering with the site, I'm ready to start writing.
