---
title: "October 2023 logbook"
date: 2023-10-31T00:40:18-05:00
tags: [logbook, film, literature]
---

I thought it might be fun at the end of each month to list the movies I'd seen that month & some thoughts about each.

*Rope* (Alfred Hitchcock, 1948). Jacqueline & I decided to watch some Hitchcock in honor of Halloween at the end of the month. We've seen a few Hitchcock already, but not *Rope*. I enjoyed it, though it's not my favorite of his (that remains *Psycho*). I love good, long scenes, & Hitchcock's clever camera work to make the entire film seem like a single take really ratchets up the tension.

*Scream* (Wes Craven, 1996). I'd seen bits of the recent *Scream* reboot on someone else's screen on an international flight a couple years ago, but this is the first time I've actually watched a *Scream* film start to finish. It was great! It was meta without being too in-your-face about it (with maybe an exception or two here or there), & there were some unexpected resonances with *Rope* (chiefly in the homoerotic subtext between Billy & Stu). The opening sequence is genuinely frightening, & killing off Drew Barrymore at the very beginning is brilliant. I have little interest in the rest of the franchise, but this was a good one.

*The Greatest Showman* (Michael Gracey, 2017). One of my students watched my favorite movie, *Raiders of the Lost Ark*, & insisted I watch this movie in return. I'll confess, I didn't love it. The music really didn't do anything, and the story felt pretty tepid (surprising, considering the actual history of P.T. Barnum's life).

*The Birds* (Alfred Hitchcock, 1963). Another Hitchcock in honor of Halloween month. Amazing how threatening Hitchcock makes birds seem---the scene as the birds gather outside the schoolhouse!---& how he used *real birds* for almost the entire movie.

*A Serious Man* (Joel Coen & Ethan Coen, 2009). I watched this movie as a candidate for the [theology & film course I'm designing](https://micro.andrewbelfield.com/2023/10/30/ive-been-spending.html). I think it'll make the syllabus. The film obviously engages the book of Job but also has some pretty significant differences. I think it will make for great discussion, to bring this film into dialogue with its source material.

*A Nightmare on Elm Street* (Wes Craven, 1984). Another Wes Craven to finish out October. I thought this was pretty good, though I didn't enjoy it as much as *Scream*. It had some creepy sequences but I think I really only jumped once or twice (& I tend to be very jumpy during scary movies). I liked Nancy's character. That last sequence was very confusing though (& apparently an addition at the insistence of the producer). I'd like to see *Wes Craven's New Nightmare* now.

I'd hoped to see *Killers of the Flower Moon* this month, but it was a very busy month at work. I'm planning to see it in the next week or so.
